<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>A. MAKE CSOUND RUN</title>
  </head>
  <body><h1>A. MAKE CSOUND RUN</h1><h2>Csound and Frontends</h2>
<p>The core element of Csound is an audio engine for the Csound
language. It has no graphical interface and it is designed to take
Csound text files (called ".csd" files) and produce audio, either
in realtime, or by writing to a file. It can still be used in this
way but most users nowadays prefer to use Csound via a frontend. A
frontend is an application which assists you in writing code and
running Csound. Beyond the functions of a simple text editor, a
frontend environment will offer colour coded highlighting of
language specific keywords and quick access to an integrated help
system. A frontend can also expand possibilities by providing tools
to build interactive interfaces (GUI widgets) as well, sometimes,
as advanced compositional tools.</p>
<p>In 2009 the Csound developers decided to include <a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://csoundqt.github.io">CsoundQt</a> as the standard
frontend to be included with the Csound distribution, so you will
already have this frontend if you have installed any of the
pre-built versions of Csound. Conversely if you install a frontend
you will usually require a separate installation of Csound in order
for it to function. If you experience any problems with CsoundQt,
or simply prefer another frontend design, try <a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://cabbageaudio.com/">Cabbage</a>, <a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://winxound.codeplex.com">WinXound</a> or <a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://blue.kunstmusik.com/">Blue</a> as alternatives.
Section 10 of this manual provides more information about the
frontends.</p>
<h2>How to Download and Install Csound</h2>
<p>To get Csound you first need to download the package for your
system from the Download page of the Csound project on Github:
<a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://csound.github.io/download.html">http://csound.github.io/download.html</a></p>
<p>There are many files here, so here are some guidelines to help
you choose the appropriate version.</p>
<h3>Windows</h3>
<p>Windows installers are the ones ending in <em>.exe</em>. Look
for the latest version of Csound and find a file which should be
called something like:
<em>Setup_Csound6_6.07.0beta.exe.</em><em><br/></em></p>
<p>After you have downloaded the installer simply double-click it
start the installation process. This will invoke 8 simple
steps:</p>
<ol>
<li>A welcome screen advises you to close other programs.</li>
<li>After reading and accepting the licence agreement click
'Next'.</li>
<li>Select the destination for the Csound program files. The
default is C:\Program Files (x86)\Csound6.</li>
<li>Choose the components to be installed. Currently (ver. 6.07)
there are only 3 items: <strong>Core Csound</strong> is obligatory.
<strong>Python features</strong> are optional but will be required
if you intend to use CsoundQt as a frontend for Csound. You will
also need to install <a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://www.python.org/getit/">Python 2.7</a>. <strong>Pure
data Csound~ object</strong> will allow you to run Csound from
within Pure Data. To do this will require installing <a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="https://puredata.info/downloads">Pure Data</a>.</li>
<li><strong>Select Start Menu Folder</strong> allows you to define
a folder name other than the default 'Csound 6' for the folder
containing the various Csound components. Alternatively you can
choose not to create a start menu folder. </li>
<li>Next there is an option to add the Csoound application
directory to your PATH variable. Adding this will allow you to run
Csound from the command line from any directory location.</li>
<li>Next a window reminds you of what will be installed and what
changes will be made to your system.</li>
<li>Upon clicking install the installation takes place.</li>
<li>A window informs you that installation is complete. You can
click 'Finish'.</li>
</ol>
<p>This installer will also automatically install CsoundQt which
can be used as a frontend for your work with Csound (Csound is not
run by double-clicking Csound.exe). </p>
<p>You can create addional shorcuts to the CsoundQt executable by
locating it in its default location, C:\Program Files
(x86)\Csound6\bin, and right-clicking it and selecting 'Pin to
Start' or 'Pin to Taskbar' as desired. You can create a desktop
shortcut by right-clicking and dragging the CsoundQt executable
onto the desktop and selecting 'Create Shortcuts Here' from the
menu that pops up.   </p>
<p>Other frontends for Csound, such as Cabbage and WinXound, need
to be downloaded and installed separately.</p>
<h3>Mac OS X</h3>
<p>The Mac OS X installers are the files ending in <em>.dmg</em>.
Look for the latest version of Csound for your particular system,
for example a Universal binary for 10.9 will be called something
like: <em>csound6.06-OSX-universal.dmg</em>. When you double click
the downloaded file, you will have a disk image on your desktop,
with the Csound installer, CsoundQt and a readme file. Double-click
the installer and follow the instructions. Csound and the basic
Csound utilities will be installed. To install the CsoundQt
frontend, you only need to move it to your Applications folder.</p>
<h3>Linux and others</h3>
<p>Csound is available from the official package repositories for
many distributions like OpenSuse, Debian, Ubuntu, Fedora, Archlinux
and Gentoo. If there are no binary packages for your platform, or
you need a more recent version, you can get the sources from the
<a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="https://github.com/csound/csound/tree/develop">Github
page</a> and build from source. You will find the most recent build
instructions in the <a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://github.com/csound/csound/blob/develop/BUILD.md">Build.md</a>
file in the Csound sources or in the <a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="https://github.com/csound/csound/wiki">Github Csound
Wiki</a>.</p>
<h3>iOS</h3>
<p>If you would just like to run Csound on your iPad, there is an
app for iOS called CsoundPad:<br/>
http://itunes.apple.com/app/csoundpad/id861008380?mt=8#</p>
<p>If you are a developer, Csound can be run in an iOS app that you
are programming by including the Csound-for-iOS files in your Xcode
project. For example for version 6.09 of Csound, the files are in
this archive:<br/>
<a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-iOS-6.09.1.zip">
http://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-iOS-6.09.1.zip</a><br/>

The "csound-iOS-6.09.1.zip" file contains an archive of an example
project and PDF manual.</p>
<p>Some sample projects:</p>
<ul>
<li>AudioKit (<a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://audiokit.io/">http://audiokit.io</a>) is an
Objective-C and Swift framework for building iOS and OSX apps using
Csound as the audio engine.</li>
<li>csGrain, developed by the Boulanger Labs (<a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://www.boulangerlabs.com">http://www.boulangerlabs.com</a>),
is a complex audio effects app that works with audio files or live
audio input.</li>
<li>Portable Dandy, an innovative sampler synthesiser for iOS (see
<a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://www.barefoot-coders.com">http://www.barefoot-coders.com</a>).</li>
<li>iPulsaret, an impressive synthesizer app (see <a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://www.densitytigs.com">http://www.densitytigs.com</a>). </li>
</ul>
<h3>Android</h3>
<p>If you want to play your .csd files on your Android smartphone
or tablet, follow the "Android App" link on Csound's Download page.
This leads you to Google's Play Store from which you can install it
for free. Chapter <a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="f-csound-on-android">12F</a> in this manual describes how to
use Csound on Android.</p>
<p>If you are a developer, download the Android SDK, for
instance:</p>
<p><a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip">
http://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip</a></p>
<div>
<p>On Google's Play Store there are some apps that use Csound.
Below is a small sample of such apps:</p>
<ul>
<li>DIY Sound Salad, developed by Zatchu <a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://www.zatchu.com">(http://zatchu.com/category/story/</a>), is
a multi sample record and playback app. Quite enjoyable to
use.</li>
<li>Chime Pad, developed by Arthur B. Hunkins (<a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://www.arthunkins.com">http://www.arthunkins.com</a>), is
a soothing chime player app.</li>
<li>Psycho Flute developed by Brian Redfern (source code available
at <a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://github.com/bredfern/PsychoFlute">http://github.com/bredfern/PsychoFlute</a>),
it is a "physical modelling flute synth". Both fun and
interesting.</li>
</ul>
</div>
<h2>Install Problems?</h2>
<p>If, for any reason, you can't find the CsoundQt frontend on your
system after install, or if you want to install the most recent
version of CsoundQt, or if you prefer another frontend altogether:
see the CSOUND FRONTENDS section of this manual for further
information. If you have any install problems, consider joining the
<a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="https://listserv.heanet.ie/cgi-bin/wa?A0=CSOUND">Csound
Mailing List</a> to report your issues, or write a mail to one of
the maintainers (see ON THIS RELEASE).</p>
<h2>The Csound Reference Manual</h2>
<p>The Csound Reference Manual is an indispensable companion to
Csound. It is available in various formats from the same place as
the Csound installers, and it is installed with the packages for OS
X and Windows. It can also be browsed online at <a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://csound.github.io/docs/manual/index.html">http://csound.github.io/docs/manual/index.html</a>.
Many frontends will provide you with direct and easy access to
it.</p>
<h2>How to Execute a Simple Example</h2>
<h3><strong>Using CsoundQt</strong></h3>
<p>Launch CsoundQt. Go into the CsoundQt menubar and choose:
Examples-&gt;Getting started...-&gt; Basics-&gt; HelloWorld</p>
<p>You will see a very basic Csound file (.csd) with a lot of
comments in green.</p>
<p>Click on the "RUN" icon in the CsoundQt control bar to start the
realtime Csound engine. You should hear a 440 Hz sine wave.</p>
<p>You can also run the Csound engine in the terminal from within
CsoundQt. Just click on "Run in Term". A console will pop up and
Csound will be executed as an independent process. The result
should be the same - the 440 Hz "beep".</p>
<h3><strong>Using the Terminal / Console</strong></h3>
<p>1. Save the following code in any plain text editor as
HelloWorld.csd.</p>
<p>   <em><strong>EXAMPLE
02A01_HelloWorld.csd</strong></em> </p>
<pre>&lt;CsoundSynthesizer&gt;
&lt;CsOptions&gt;
-odac
&lt;/CsOptions&gt;
&lt;CsInstruments&gt;
;Example by Alex Hofmann
instr 1
aSin      poscil    0dbfs/4, 440
          out       aSin
endin
&lt;/CsInstruments&gt;
&lt;CsScore&gt;
i 1 0 1
&lt;/CsScore&gt;
&lt;/CsoundSynthesizer&gt;</pre>
<p>2. Open the Terminal / Prompt / Console</p>
<p>3. Type: <em>csound /full/path/HelloWorld.csd</em></p>
<p>where <em>/full/path/HelloWorld.csd</em> is the complete path to
your file. You also execute this file by just typing
<em>csound</em> then dragging the file into the terminal window and
then hitting return.</p>
<p>You should hear a 440 Hz tone.</p>
<h3><strong>Using Cabbage</strong></h3>
<p>Cabbage is an alternative frontend for working with Csound. It
is most similar to CsoundQt but its main differences with CsoundQt
are that graphical user interface (GUI) can be created either by
drawing (click and drag) or by typing code. In CsoundQt the GUI
code is 'hidden' from us in the editor so that we only create GUI
using the mouse. Cabbage can also export instruments and effects as
VST and AU plugins, and even includes its own host, Cabbage Studio,
for graphically connecting multiple instruments and effect in a
manner similar to Pure Data. Cabbage is a less comprehensive
frontend that CsoundQt but some users prefer this simplicity.</p>
<p>To get started with Cabbage you will need to first download
<a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://cabbageaudio.com/download/" target="_blank">Cabbage</a>. Cabbage will normally come bundled with its
own version of Csound and will not require a separate installation
of Csound. Any currently installed versions of Csound will be
ignored by Cabbage.</p>
<p>Once installed, launch Cabbage and then go to Options-&gt;New
Cabbage...-&gt;Instrument to create a new patch (called a Cabbage
patch). Cabbage will start you off with a simple functional
instrument with a virtual keyboard but you can also use the one
listed below which features a virtual keyboard and a volume
control. To open Cabbage's integrated code editor go to
Options-&gt;View Source Editor. You can then paste in the code
shown below, or just make modifications to the default instrument
code. If you want to make changes to what external hardware devices
Cabbage uses, such as audio and MIDI hardware, go to
Options-&gt;Audio Settings. The options available will vary
depending on your specific system, so will not be discussed any
further here.</p>
<p>When creating a realtime instrument, there is no necessity to
include any Csound score events (or any &lt;score&gt; tags). With
earlier versions of Csound it used to be that we needed to include
a 'dummy' score event to keep realtime performance going but with
more recent versions of Csound this is no longer the case.</p>
<p>The key element that differentiates Cabbage from standard Csound
is the inclusion of Cabbage specific code, mainly used for creating
a graphical user interface, held within the start and end tags:
&lt;Cabbage&gt; and &lt;/Cabbage&gt;. Communication from the
Cabbage GUI to Csound is either transparent, as in the case of the
'keyboard' widget, or via named channels and the <a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="file:///C:/Program%20Files%20(x86)/Csound6/doc/manual/chnget.html">
chnget</a> opcode in the Csound orchestra when using most other
Cabbage widgets such as 'rslider' (a rotary slider). For additional
information on Cabbage please consult the chapter on <a title="https://github.com/csound/csound/releases/download/6.09.1/csound-android-6.09.1.zip" href="http://flossmanuals.net/csound/cabbage/">Cabbage</a>.</p>
<p>   <em><strong>EXAMPLE
02A02_HelloCabbage.csd</strong></em> </p>
<pre>
&lt;Cabbage&gt;<br/>form size(420,100)<br/>keyboard bounds(10,10,300,80)<br/>rslider bounds(325,15,80,80), channel("level"), text("Level"), range(0,1,0.3)<br/>&lt;/Cabbage&gt;<br/><br/>&lt;CsoundSynthesizer&gt;<br/><br/>&lt;CsOptions&gt;<br/>-dm0 -n -+rtmidi=null -M0<br/>&lt;/CsOptions&gt;<br/><br/>&lt;CsInstruments&gt;<br/><br/>sr     = 44100<br/>ksmps  = 32<br/>nchnls = 2<br/>0dbfs  = 1<br/><br/>instr    1<br/> icps cpsmidi<br/> klev chnget  "level"<br/> a1   poscil klev*0.2,icps<br/>      outs   a1,a1<br/>endin<br/><br/>&lt;/CsInstruments&gt;<br/><br/>&lt;/CsoundSynthesizer&gt;</pre>
</body>
</html>
