<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>HOW TO USE THIS MANUAL</title>
  </head>
  <body><h1>HOW TO USE THIS MANUAL</h1><p>The goal of this manual is to provide a readable introduction to
Csound. In no way is it meant as a replacement for the <a href="http://csound.github.io/docs/manual/index.html">Canonical Csound
Reference Manual</a>. It is intended as an
introduction-tutorial-reference hybrid, gathering together the most
important information you will need to work with Csound in a
variety of situations. In many places links are provided to other
resources such as <a href="http://csound.github.io/docs/manual/index.html">The Canonical
Csound Reference Manual</a>, the <a href="http://csoundjournal.com/index.html">Csound Journal</a>, example
collections and more.</p>
<p>It is not necessary to read each chapter in sequence, feel free
to jump to any chapter that interests you, although bear in mind
that occasionally a chapter may make reference to a previous
one.</p>
<p>If you are new to Csound, the QUICK START chapter will be the
best place to go to help you get started. BASICS provides a general
introduction to key concepts about digital sound, vital to
understanding how Csound deals with audio. The CSOUND LANGUAGE
chapter provides greater detail about how Csound works and how to
work with Csound.</p>
<p>SOUND SYNTHESIS introduces various methods of creating sound
from scratch and SOUND MODIFICATION describes various methods of
transforming sounds that already exist. SAMPLES outlines various
ways you can record and playback audio samples in Csound; an area
that might be of particular interest to those intent on using
Csound as a real-time performance instrument. The MIDI and OPEN
SOUND CONTROL chapters focus on different methods of controlling
Csound using external software or hardware. The final chapters
introduce various front-ends that can be used to interface with the
Csound engine and Csound's communication with other
applications.</p>
<p>If you would like to know more about a topic, and in particular
about the use of any opcode, please refer first to the <a href="http://csound.github.io/docs/manual/index.html">Canonical Csound
Reference Manual</a>.</p>
<p>All files - examples and audio files - can be downloaded at
<a href="http://www.csound-tutorial.net">www.csound-tutorial.net</a>. If
you use CsoundQt, you can find all the examples in CsoundQt's
examples menu under "Floss Manual Examples". When learning Csound
(or any other programming language), you may find it beneficial to
type the examples out by hand as it will help you to memorise
Csound's syntax as well as how to use its opcodes. The more
familiar you become with typing out Csound code, the more
proficient you will become at implementing your own ideas from low
level principles; your focus will shift from the code itself to the
musical idea behind the code.</p>
<p>Like other audio tools, Csound can produce an extreme dynamic
range (before considering Csound's ability to implement compression
and limiting). Be careful when you run the examples! Set the volume
on your amplifier low to start with and take special care when
using headphones.</p>
<p>You can help to improve this manual either by reporting bugs or
by sending requests for new topics or by joining as a writer. Just
contact one of the maintainers (see ON THIS RELEASE).</p>
<p>Some issues of this textbook can be ordered as a print-on-demand
hard copy at <a href="how-to-use-this-manual/how-to-use-this-manual/www.lulu.com">www.lulu.com</a>.
Just use Lulu's search utility and look for "Csound".</p>
</body>
</html>
