<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/#" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>LINKS</title>
  </head>
  <body><h1>LINKS</h1><h2>Downloads</h2>
<p>Csound FLOSS Manual Files: <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://files.csound-tutorial.net/floss_manual/">http://files.csound-tutorial.net/floss_manual/</a></p>
<p>Csound: <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://csound.com/download.html">http://csound.com/download.html</a></p>
<p>Csound source code: <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://github.com/csound/csound%20">http://github.com/csound/csound</a></p>
<p>Csound's User Defined Opcodes: <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.csounds.com/udo/">http://www.csounds.com/udo/</a> 
and <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://github.com/csudo/csudo">http://github.com/csudo/csudo</a></p>
<p>CsoundQt: <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="https://github.com/CsoundQt/CsoundQt/releases">http://github.com/CsoundQt/CsoundQt/releases</a></p>
<p>WinXound: <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://mnt.conts.it/winxound/">http://mnt.conts.it/winxound/</a></p>
<p>Blue: <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://blue.kunstmusik.com/">http://blue.kunstmusik.com/</a> </p>
<p>Cabbage: <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://cabbageaudio.com/">http://cabbageaudio.com/</a></p>
<h2>Community</h2>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://csound.github.io/index.html">Csound's</a> info page on
github is a good collection of links and basic infos.</p>
<p>The <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://csoundjournal.com/index.html">Csound Journal</a> is a main
source for different aspects of working with Csound.</p>
<h2>Mailing Lists and Bug Tracker</h2>
<p>Main place for questions and informations is the Csound Mailing
List. To subscribe to the <strong>Csound User</strong> Discussion
List, go to <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="https://listserv.heanet.ie/cgi-bin/wa?A0=CSOUND">https://listserv.heanet.ie/cgi-bin/wa?A0=CSOUND</a>.
After subscribing, put questions at csound@listserv.heanet.ie. You
can search in the list archive at <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://old.nabble.com/Csound-f480.html">nabble.com</a>.</p>
<p>To subscribe to the <strong>CsoundQt User</strong> Discussion
List, go to <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="https://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/qutecsound-users">https://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/qutecsound-users</a>.
You can browse the list archive <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://sourceforge.net/mailarchive/forum.php?forum_name=qutecsound-users">
here</a>.</p>
<p><strong>Csound Developer</strong> Discussions: <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="https://listserv.heanet.ie/cgi-bin/wa?A0=CSOUND-DEV">https://listserv.heanet.ie/cgi-bin/wa?A0=CSOUND-DEV</a></p>
<p><strong>Blue</strong>: <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://sourceforge.net/mail/?group_id=74382">http://sourceforge.net/mail/?group_id=74382</a></p>
<p><strong>Cabbage</strong> <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/">http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/</a></p>
<p>Please report any <strong>bug</strong> you experienced in
<strong>Csound</strong> at <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://github.com/csound/csound/issues">http://github.com/csound/csound/issues</a>,
and a <strong>CsoundQt</strong> related bug at <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://sourceforge.net/tracker/?func=browse&amp;group_id=227265&amp;atid=1070588">
http://sourceforge.net/tracker/?func=browse&amp;group_id=227265&amp;atid=1070588</a>.
Every bug report is an important contribution.</p>
<h2>Tutorials</h2>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.csounds.com/tootsother/vercoetut/Vercoe.html">A
Beginning Tutorial</a> is a short introduction from Barry Vercoe,
the "father of Csound".</p>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.csounds.com/toots/index.html">An Instrument Design
TOOTorial</a> by Richard Boulanger (1991) is another classical
introduction, still very worth to read.</p>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.csounds.com/chapter1/index.html">Introduction to Sound
Design in Csound</a> also by Richard Boulanger, is the first
chapter of the famous Csound Book (2000).</p>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.virtual-sound.com/sv/index.php?option=com_content&amp;view=article&amp;id=46&amp;Itemid=56">
Virtual Sound</a> by Alessandro Cipriani and Maurizio Giri
(2000)</p>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://michael-gogins.com/archives/tutorial.pdf">A Csound
Tutorial</a> by Michael Gogins (2009), one of the main Csound
Developers.</p>
<h2>Video Tutorials</h2>
<p>A playlist as overview by Alex Hofmann:</p>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.youtube.com/view_play_list?p=3EE3219702D17FD3">http://www.youtube.com/view_play_list?p=3EE3219702D17FD3</a></p>
<h3>CsoundQt (QuteCsound)</h3>
<p>QuteCsound: Where to start?<br/>
<a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0XcQ3ReqJTM">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0XcQ3ReqJTM</a></p>
<p>First instrument:<br/>
<a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P5OOyFyNaCA">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P5OOyFyNaCA</a></p>
<p>Using MIDI:<br/>
<a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8zszIN_N3bQ">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8zszIN_N3bQ</a></p>
<p>About configuration:<br/>
<a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KgYea5s8tFs">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KgYea5s8tFs</a></p>
<p>Presets tutorial:<br/>
<a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KKlCTxmzcS0">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KKlCTxmzcS0</a><br/>

<a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aES-ZfanF3c">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aES-ZfanF3c</a></p>
<p>Live Events tutorial:<br/>
<a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O9WU7DzdUmE">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O9WU7DzdUmE</a><br/>

<a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hs3eO7o349k">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hs3eO7o349k</a><br/>

<a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yUMzp6556Kw">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yUMzp6556Kw</a></p>
<p>New editing features in 0.6.0:<br/>
<a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hk1qPlnyv88">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hk1qPlnyv88</a></p>
<p>New features in 0.7.0:<br/>
<a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iytVlxMILyw">https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iytVlxMILyw</a></p>
<p>New features in 0.9.2:<br/>
<a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="https://youtu.be/q_1SUT1wD6o">https://youtu.be/q_1SUT1wD6o</a></p>
<h3>Csoundo (Csound and Processing)</h3>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://csoundblog.com/2010/08/csound-processing-experiment-i/">http://csoundblog.com/2010/08/csound-processing-experiment-i/</a></p>
<h3>Open Sound Control in Csound</h3>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://csoundblog.com/2010/08/csound-processing-experiment-i/">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JX1C3TqP_9Y</a></p>
<h3>Csound and Inscore</h3>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://vimeo.com/54160283">http://vimeo.com/54160283</a>
(installation)<br/>
<a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://vimeo.com/54160405">http://vimeo.com/54160405</a>
(examples)<br/>
german versions:<br/>
<a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://vimeo.com/54159567">http://vimeo.com/54159567</a>
(installation)<br/>
<a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://vimeo.com/54159964">http://vimeo.com/54159964</a>
(beispiele) </p>
<h2>Csound Conferences</h2>
<p>See the list at <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://csound.com/community.html">http://csound.com/community.html</a></p>
<h2>Example Collections</h2>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://iainmccurdy.org/csound.html">Csound Realtime Examples</a>
by Iain McCurdy is one of the most inspiring and up-to-date
collections.</p>
<p>The <a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.codemist.co.uk/AmsterdamCatalog/">Amsterdam Catalog</a>
by John-Philipp Gather is particularily interesting because of the
adaption of Jean-Claude Risset's famous "Introductory Catalogue of
Computer Synthesized Sounds" from 1969.</p>
<h2>Books</h2>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/csound-book">The Csound Book</a>
(2000) edited by Richard Boulanger is still the compendium for
anyone who really wants to go in depth with Csound.</p>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="https://www.contemponet.com/shop/virtual-sound/">Virtual Sound</a>
by Alessandro Cipriani and Maurizio Giri (2000)</p>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.peterlang.com/index.cfm?event=cmp.ccc.seitenstruktur.detailseiten&amp;seitentyp=produkt&amp;pk=13446&amp;CFID=709575&amp;CFTOKEN=84330415">
Signale, Systeme, und Klangsysteme</a> by Martin Neukom (2003,
german) has many interesting examples in Csound.</p>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262014465">The Audio Programming
Book</a> edited by Richard Boulanger and Victor Lazzarini (2011) is
a major source with many references to Csound.</p>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="https://www.ebooks.com/845813/csound-power/aikin-jim/">Csound
Power!</a> by Jim Aikin (2012) is a perfect up-to-date introduction
for beginners.</p>
<p><a title="http://forum.cabbageaudio.com/" href="http://www.springer.com/de/book/9783319453682">Csound — A Sound
and Music Computing System</a> (2016) by Victor Lazzarini and
others is the new Csound Book, covering all parts of the Csound
audio programming language in depth.</p>
</body>
</html>
