# HOW TO USE THIS MANUAL

The goal of this manual is to provide a readable introduction to Csound.
In no way is it meant as a replacement for the [Canonical Csound
Reference Manual](http://csound.github.io/docs/manual/index.html). It is
intended as an introduction-tutorial-reference hybrid, gathering
together the most important information you will need to work with
Csound in a variety of situations. In many places links are provided to
other resources such as [The Canonical Csound Reference
Manual](http://csound.github.io/docs/manual/index.html), the [Csound
Journal](http://csoundjournal.com/index.html), example collections and
more.

It is not necessary to read each chapter in sequence, feel free to jump
to any chapter that interests you, although bear in mind that
occasionally a chapter may make reference to a previous one.

If you are new to Csound, the QUICK START section will be the best place
to go to help you get started. BASICS provides a general introduction to
key concepts about digital sound, vital to understanding how Csound
deals with audio. The CSOUND LANGUAGE section provides greater detail
about how Csound works and how to work with Csound.

SOUND SYNTHESIS introduces various methods of creating sound from
scratch and SOUND MODIFICATION describes various methods of transforming
sounds that already exist. SAMPLES outlines various ways you can record
and playback audio samples in Csound; an area that might be of
particular interest to those intent on using Csound as a real-time
performance instrument. The MIDI and OPEN SOUND CONTROL chapters focus
on different methods of controlling Csound using external software or
hardware. The final chapters introduce various front-ends that can be
used to interface with the Csound engine and Csound's communication
with other applications.

If you would like to know more about a topic, and in particular about
the use of any opcode, please refer first to the [Canonical Csound
Reference Manual](http://csound.github.io/docs/manual/index.html).

All files - examples and audio files - can be downloaded at
[www.csound-tutorial.net](http://www.csound-tutorial.net). If you use
CsoundQt, you can find all the examples in CsoundQt's examples menu
under _Floss Manual Examples_. When learning Csound (or any other
programming language), you may find it beneficial to type the examples
out by hand as it will help you to memorise Csound's syntax as well as
how to use its opcodes. The more familiar you become with typing out
Csound code, the more proficient you will become at implementing your
own ideas from low level principles; your focus will shift from the code
itself to the musical idea behind the code.

Like other audio tools, Csound can produce an extreme dynamic range
(before considering Csound's ability to implement compression and
limiting). Be careful when you run the examples! Set the volume on your
amplifier low to start with and take special care when using headphones.

You can help to improve this manual either by reporting bugs or by
sending requests for new topics or by joining as a writer. Just contact
one of the maintainers (see ON THIS RELEASE).

Some issues of this textbook can be ordered as a print-on-demand hard
copy at [www.lulu.com](https://www.lulu.com/). Just use Lulu's search
utility and look for _Csound_.
